International Journal of Trend in Research and Development, Volume 3(2), ISSN: 2394-9333
www.ijtrd.com
An Investigation Report on Failure of Building
Foundations
1Akashdeep Nandi, 2Neeteesh Kumar, 3Abhishek Mazumdar,
1,2,3Department of Civil Engineering, Chhattisgarh Swami Vivekanand Technical University, Bhilai, Chhattisgarh, India
Abstract: The construction site is located just ahead of
II. FAILURE OF FOUNDATION
Shri Shankaracharya Mahavidyalaya, Junwani, Bhilai.
During the pre-construction of foundation, shear failure Failure of foundation can cause the building to collapse.
occurred in the soil which resulted in settlement of Foundation is the first term element of a building where
foundation, development of cracks and various other the construction starts, but when it falls it can cause many
problems. Movement and distress in low rise building defects in the structure including failure or collapse of the
most commonly occur due to the interaction between the structure. Repair of defects in foundation are most
footing system and the ground. This summarizes the study difficult and very costly, so it is most important to
that is carried out to assess the possible causes of risk in understand the types of foundation failure to avoid them
the G+1 residential building founded on pile foundation. by taking necessary steps before the construction starts.
Keywords: Foundations, Footings, Failure, Footings, Soil The design of structures should satisfy three fundamental
mechanics, Shear stress, Shear Strains. requirements:
I. INTRODUCTION 1. Stability: The structure should be stable under the
action of loads.
A foundations is the component of an Architectural
2. Strength: The structure should resist safely stresses
structure which connects it to the ground, and transfers the
induced by the loads.
load from structure to the ground. Foundations are
3. Serviceability: The structure should perform
generally considered, either Shallow or Deep. Foundation
satisfactorily under service loads.
Engineering is the application of Soil mechanics and Rock
mechanics (Geotechnical Engineering) in the design of The main causes of failure of foundations are as follows:
foundation element of structures. Foundations are
1. Unequal settlement of the sub-soil
primarily required to support building construction. The
2. Unequal settlement of the masonry
foundation is that portion of a structure that transfers the
3. Withdrawal of moisture from the sub- soil
loads from the building to the underlying foundation
4. Lateral pressure on the superstructures
material.
5. Lateral movement of the sub-soil
There are two major requirements to be satisfied in the
6. Weathering of sub-soil due to Transpiration of trees
design of foundations:
and shrubs
1. Provision of an adequate factor of safety against
7. Atmospheric action.
failure of the foundation material. Failure of the
III. EVALUATION OF SOIL STRENGTH
foundation material may lead to failure of the
foundation and may also lead to failure of the entire The soil mass can be evaluated by determining the
structure. following aspects of the soil component:-
2. Adequate provision against damage to the structure
1. Bearing strength of soil
which may be caused by total or differential
settlements of the foundations. 2. Penetration Strength of soil
IJTRD | Mar - Apr 2016
Available Online@www.ijtrd.com 397
International Journal of Trend in Research and Development, Volume 3(2), ISSN: 2394-9333
www.ijtrd.com
3. Shear strength of soil 2. Triaxial shear test
3. Vane shear test
A. Bearing strength of soil
4. Unconfined compression test.
Bearing capacity is the power of foundation soil to hold
b. Penetration test
the forces from the superstructure without undergoing
1. California Bearing Ratio (CBR) Test
shear failure or excessive settlement. Foundation soil is
that portion of ground which is subjected to additional c. Bearing test
stresses when foundation and superstructure are 1. Plate Load test.
constructed on the ground. d. Group Index Test.
B. Penetration strength test of soil V. PREVENTIVE MEASURES AGAINST
FOUNDATION FAILURE
The main purpose of the test is to provide an indication of
the relative density of granular deposits, such - Lowering water table
as sands and gravels from which it is virtually impossible
- Pre-loading
to obtain undisturbed samples. The great merit of the test,
- Drive pile to rock
and the main reason for its widespread use is that it is
- Compaction
simple and inexpensive. The soil strength parameters
which can be inferred are approximate, but may give a - Use of deep foundations
useful guide in ground conditions where it may not be - Treat or stabilize soil
possible to obtain borehole samples of adequate quality - Maintain constant water table
like gravels, sands, silts, clay containing sand or gravel
- Maintain constant water table
and weak rock. In conditions where the quality of the
- Include swell pressure in design
undisturbed sample is suspect, e.g., very silty or very
sandy clays, or hard clays, it is often advantageous to
Acknowledgment
alternate the sampling with standard penetration tests to
check the strength. The student contributors would like to thank Ms. Aparna
Shelare, Assistant Professor in Shri Shankaracharya
C. Shear strength of soil
Group of Institution, Bhilai, for her guidance in our
Shear strength is a term used in soil mechanics to
entitled work.
delineate the extent of the shear stress that a soil can
CONCLUSION
sustain. The shear resistance of soil is a result of friction
and interlocking of particles, and possibly adherence or After analyzing the various foundations and processing
bonding at particle contacts. Due to interlocking, them into the decision matrix, Bored pile foundations
particulate material may expand or contract in volume as appear to be the most suitable, however there is very little
it is subject to shear strains. If soil expands its volume, the information known at this stage and it would be possible
density of particles will decrease and the strength will to use raft, driven piles or bored piles on such a project.
decrease; in this case, the peak strength would be followed Strip and pad foundation would not be suitable sue to
by a reduction of shear stress. The stress-strain land, size of building and loads the foundations would
relationship levels off when the material stops expanding have to cope with. Raft foundation although used mainly
or contracting, and when interparticle bonds are ruptured. for light weight structures could be designed to cope with
The theoretical state at which the shear stress and density greater loads.
remain constant while the shear strain increases may be
References
called the critical state, steady state, or residual strength.
[1] Soil Mechanics; Dr. B.C. Punamia, Ashok K. Jain
There are three modes of shear failure, i.e. General, Local
& Arun K. Jain
and Punching shear failures depending upon the
[2] Soil Mechanics And Foundation Engg.; V.N.S.
compressibility of soil and depth of footing with respect to
Murthy
its breadth (i.e D/B Ratio).
[3] Soil Mechanics And Foundation Engg; S.K.Garg
IV. TESTS FOR EVALUATION OF SOIL [4] Soil Mechanics And Foundation Engg.: Dr S.K.
STRENGTH Arora
[5] http://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/
There are various tests carried out for evaluation of soil
[6] http://theconstructuor.org/
strength. Generally it is done by -
[7] http://abuildersengineer.com
a. Shear test
1. Direct shear test
IJTRD | Mar - Apr 2016
Available Online@www.ijtrd.com 398